README.md, before:

# Overview

These scripts process a Wikipedia dump, extracting and structuring:
- pages
- mention/entity statistics 
- in- /out-link information 
- and provides an alignment between Wikipedia pages and Wikidata IDs.


## 1. Pre-process a Wikipedia Dump

First, download a Wikipedia dump from [here](https://dumps.wikimedia.org/enwiki/) (we used `enwiki-20211001`). Then process it with the [WikiExtractor](http://medialab.di.unipi.it/wiki/Wikipedia_Extractor) and store it into the `../resources/wikipedia/processedWiki/` folder. As in the current version of the WikiExtractor the possibility of keeping sections is not offered anymore, we have used [this version](https://github.com/attardi/wikiextractor/tree/e4abb4cbd019b0257824ee47c23dd163919b731b) of the code from March 2020. To obtain it:

```
git clone https://github.com/attardi/wikiextractor.git
cd wikiextractor
git checkout e4abb4cbd019b0257824ee47c23dd163919b731b 
```

Then you can run the tool with the following command:

```
python WikiExtractor.py -l -s -o ../resources/wikipedia/processedWiki/ [here put the path to the Wikipedia Dump .xml.bz2]
```

Note that the flag -s will keep the sections and the flag -l the links.

## 2. Extract entities/mentions frequency counts and pages

Having the Wiki dump processed by the WikiExtractor in the `../resources/wikipedia/processedWiki/` folder, the first step is to extract entity and mention statistics (e.g., how many times the mention `London` is pointing to Wikipedia page of the capital of the UK and how many times to `London,_Ontario`). Statistics are still divided in the n-folders consituting the output of the WikiExtractor and will be saved in the `../resources/wikipedia/extractedResources/Store-Counts/` folder as json files. The script will also store a .json file for each entity, with all its aspects (i.e., sections, see [here](https://madoc.bib.uni-mannheim.de/49596/1/EAL.pdf) to know more about Entity-Aspect Linking) in the `Pages/` folder. You should run the script as:

```
python extract_freq_and_pages.py
```
Note that you can run the script in `test` mode using the flag `-t`, which will consider only a sub-part of the corpus.

Next, you can aggregate all entity and mention counts in single `.json` file and save them in the `extractedResources/` folder by running:
```
python aggregate_all_counts.py
```
As above, you can run the script in test mode using the flag `-t`.

## 3. Map Wikipedia and Wikidata

To align the Wikipedia pages extracted from the dump to Wikidata you can use:
```
python map_wikidata_wikipedia.py
```
This script relies on the availability of a specific Wikipedia/Wikidata index, which we have created following [these instructions](https://github.com/jcklie/wikimapper#create-your-own-index), using a SQL dump from October 2021.

Our Python script will lowercase Wikipedia page titles in the database, to make sure we could match them with the extracted entities and produce two json files, mapping wikidata ids to wikipedia pages and viceversa. As above, you can run it in `test` mode as well, using the flag `-t`.

## 4. Extract locations from Wikidata

To extract locations from Wikidata (and their relevant properties) if they have a corresponding page on Wikipedia, you can use:
```
python wikidata_extraction.py -t ['True'|'False']
```

This script is partially based on [this code](https://akbaritabar.netlify.app/how_to_use_a_wikidata_dump).

The script assumes that you have already downloaded a full Wikidata dump (`latest-all.json.bz2`) from [here](https://dumps.wikimedia.org/wikidatawiki/entities/). We assume the downloaded `bz2` file is stored in `../resources/wikidata/`.

By default, the script runs on test mode. You can change this behaviour by setting `-t` to `'False'`. Beware that this step will take about 2 full days.

The output is in the form of `.csv` files that will be created in `../resources/wikidata/extracted/`, each containing 5,000 rows corresponding to geographical entities extracted from Wikidata (if they have a corresponding Wikipedia page) with the following fields (corresponding to wikidata properties, e.g. `P7959` for [historical county](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Property:P7959); a description of each can be found as comments in the [code](wikidata_extraction.py#L91-L393)):

```
'wikidata_id', 'english_label', 'instance_of', 'description_set', 'alias_dict', 'nativelabel', 'population_dict', 'area', 'hcounties', 'date_opening', 'date_closing': date_closing, 'inception_date', 'dissolved_date', 'follows', 'replaces', 'adm_regions', 'countries', 'continents', 'capital_of', 'borders', 'near_water', 'latitude', 'longitude', 'wikititle', 'geonamesIDs', 'connectswith', 'street_address', 'street_located', 'postal_code'
```

## 5. Create a Wikidata-based gazetteer

The following script creates the gazetteer.

```
python create_wk_gazetteer.py
```

To create the gazetteer, it follows these steps:
1. It concatenates the different csv files from the previous step into a unified csv: `wikidata_gazetteer.csv`.
2. It collects alternate names and mentions from our Wikipedia resources and linkes them to Wikidata locations. Four dictionaries result from this step:
    * `mentions_to_wikidata.json`: For a given mention, a dictionary where the keys are the Wikidata ID that can be referred to by this mention, and the values are the absolute number of mentions given the Wikidata ID, for example:
      ```
      >>> data["London"]
      {'Q84': 76938, 'Q170027': 142, ...}
      ```
    * `wikidata_to_mentions.json`: The reversed dictionary, for example:
      ```
      >>> data["Q84"]
      {'London': 76938, 'City of London': 1, ...}
      ```
    * `mentions_to_wikidata_normalized.json`: For a given mention, each Wikidata ID is provided with the probability of it being referred to by such mention (being referred to by this is not the same as how likely a wikipedia ID is given a certain mention. I.e. the probability of London in Kiribati (Q2477346) of being referred to as "London" is 0.80, and that's the measure we are interested in here; the probability of having the London in Kiribati entry given the mention "London" would be close to 0, because most "London" mentions refer to the city in England, for example:
      ```
      >>> data["London"]
      {'Q84': 0.9762342820164698, 'Q170027': 0.02005083309799492, ...}
      ```
    * `wikidata_to_mentions_normalized.json`: The reversed dictionary, for example:
      ```
      >>> data["Q84"]
      {'London': 0.9762342820164698, 'City of London: 1.2688584080902413e-05, ...}
      ```
3. It produces a dictionary of Wikidata entity relevance, according to Wikipedia inlinks: `overall_entity_freq_wikidata.json`.

## 6. Map Wikidata entities to classes

The following scripts maps Wikidata entities to their most relevant class:

```
python produce_entity2class_dict.py
```

The resulting mapping is stored as a dictionary a `../resources/entity2class.txt`.

## Final outputs

These scripts will produce the following outputs (note that entities are percent encoded across all files):

- In `/resources/wikipedia/extractedResources/`:
  - A `Pages/` folder, containing a `.json` file for each page available in the input Wikipedia dump. Note that due to the presence of specific characters of to the length of some pages titles, some titles have been hashed.
  - `hashed_duplicates.csv`: just to check in case there are issues with duplicate hashed filenames. This file should remain empty.  
  - A `Store-Counts/` folder, containing partial counts as `.json` files.
  - `entities_overall_dict.json`: this is a dictionary which maps each entity to a `Counter` object of all possible mentions  
  - `mention_overall_dict.json`: this is a dictionary which maps each mention to a `Counter` object of all possible associated entities.
  - `overall_entity_freq.json`: this is a dictionary which simply maps an entity to its overall frequency in the Wikipedia corpus.
  - `overall_mentions_freq.json`: this is a dictionary which simply maps a mention to its overall frequency in the Wikipedia corpus.
  - `entity_inlink_dict.json`: this dictionary gives you a list of pages linking to each Wikipedia page.
  - `entity_outlink_dict.json`: this dictionary gives you a list of pages linked from each Wikipedia page.
  - `wikipedia2wikidata.json`: a dictionary mapping Wikipedia pages to Wikidata ids.
  - `wikidata2wikipedia.json`: a dictionary mapping Wikidata ids to a list of Wikipedia pages with associated frequency.
- In `/resources/wikidata/extracted/`:
  - A list of `.csv` files, each containing 5,000 rows corresponding to geographical entities extracted from Wikidata.
  - `wikidata_gazetteer.csv`: The Wikidata-based gazetteer.
  - `mentions_to_wikidata.json`: A dictionary that maps mentions to Wikidata IDs (absolute counts).
  - `wikidata_to_mentions.json`: A dictionary that maps Wikidata IDs to mentions (absolute counts).
  - `mentions_to_wikidata_normalized.json`: A dictionary that maps mentions to Wikidata IDs (normalized).
  - `wikidata_to_mentions_normalized.json`: A dictionary that maps Wikidata IDs to mentions (normalized).
  - `overall_entity_freq_wikidata.json`: this is a dictionary which simply maps a Wikidata entity to its overall frequency in the Wikipedia corpus.
  - `gazetteer_entity_embeddings.npy`: Wikidata embeddings of entities in our gazetteer.
  - `gazetteer_entity_ids.txt`: Mapped Wikidata IDs of the entities in our gazetteer.
  - `gazetteer_wkdtclass_embeddings.npy`: Wikidata embeddings of entity classes in our gazetteer.
  - `gazetteer_wkdtclass_ids.txt`: Mapped Wikidata IDs of the entity classes in our gazetteer.

## Credits

This repository collects a series of scripts written by Mariona Coll Ardanuy and Federico Nanni as part of the Living with Machines project. It was supported by Living with Machines (AHRC grant AH/S01179X/1) and The Alan Turing Institute (EPSRC grant EP/ N510129/1).

Commit message:

Add download and merge database script

README.md, after:

# Overview

These scripts process a Wikipedia dump, extracting and structuring:
- pages
- mention/entity statistics 
- in- /out-link information 
- and provides an alignment between Wikipedia pages and Wikidata IDs.


## 1. Pre-process a Wikipedia Dump

First, download a Wikipedia dump from [here](https://dumps.wikimedia.org/enwiki/) (we used `enwiki-20211001`). Then process it with the [WikiExtractor](http://medialab.di.unipi.it/wiki/Wikipedia_Extractor) and store it into the `resources/wikipedia/processedWiki/` folder. As in the current version of the WikiExtractor the possibility of keeping sections is not offered anymore, we have used [this version](https://github.com/attardi/wikiextractor/tree/e4abb4cbd019b0257824ee47c23dd163919b731b) of the code from March 2020. To obtain it:

```
git clone https://github.com/attardi/wikiextractor.git
cd wikiextractor
git checkout e4abb4cbd019b0257824ee47c23dd163919b731b 
```

Then you can run the tool with the following command:

```
python WikiExtractor.py -l -s -o ../resources/wikipedia/processedWiki/ [here put the path to the Wikipedia Dump .xml.bz2]
```

Note that the flag -s will keep the sections and the flag -l the links.

## 2. Extract entities/mentions frequency counts and pages

Having the Wiki dump processed by the WikiExtractor in the `resources/wikipedia/processedWiki/` folder, the first step is to extract entity and mention statistics (e.g., how many times the mention `London` is pointing to Wikipedia page of the capital of the UK and how many times to `London,_Ontario`). Statistics are still divided in the n-folders consituting the output of the WikiExtractor and will be saved in the `resources/wikipedia/extractedResources/Store-Counts/` folder as json files. The script will also store a .json file for each entity, with all its aspects (i.e., sections, see [here](https://madoc.bib.uni-mannheim.de/49596/1/EAL.pdf) to know more about Entity-Aspect Linking) in the `Pages/` folder. You should run the script as:

```
python extract_freq_and_pages.py
```
Note that you can run the script in `test` mode using the flag `-t`, which will consider only a sub-part of the corpus.

Next, you can aggregate all entity and mention counts in single `.json` file and save them in the `extractedResources/` folder by running:
```
python aggregate_all_counts.py
```
As above, you can run the script in test mode using the flag `-t`.

## 3. Map Wikipedia and Wikidata

To align the Wikipedia pages extracted from the dump to Wikidata you can use:
```
python map_wikidata_wikipedia.py
```
This script relies on the availability of a specific Wikipedia/Wikidata index, which we have created following [these instructions](https://github.com/jcklie/wikimapper#create-your-own-index), using a SQL dump from October 2021.

Our Python script will lowercase Wikipedia page titles in the database, to make sure we could match them with the extracted entities and produce two json files, mapping wikidata ids to wikipedia pages and viceversa. As above, you can run it in `test` mode as well, using the flag `-t`.

## 4. Extract locations from Wikidata

To extract locations from Wikidata (and their relevant properties) if they have a corresponding page on Wikipedia, you can use:
```
python wikidata_extraction.py -t ['True'|'False']
```

This script is partially based on [this code](https://akbaritabar.netlify.app/how_to_use_a_wikidata_dump).

The script assumes that you have already downloaded a full Wikidata dump (`latest-all.json.bz2`) from [here](https://dumps.wikimedia.org/wikidatawiki/entities/). We assume the downloaded `bz2` file is stored in `resources/wikidata/`.

By default, the script runs on test mode. You can change this behaviour by setting `-t` to `'False'`. Beware that this step will take about 2 full days.

The output is in the form of `.csv` files that will be created in `resources/wikidata/extracted/`, each containing 5,000 rows corresponding to geographical entities extracted from Wikidata (if they have a corresponding Wikipedia page) with the following fields (corresponding to wikidata properties, e.g. `P7959` for [historical county](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Property:P7959); a description of each can be found as comments in the [code](wikidata_extraction.py#L91-L393)):

```
'wikidata_id', 'english_label', 'instance_of', 'description_set', 'alias_dict', 'nativelabel', 'population_dict', 'area', 'hcounties', 'date_opening', 'date_closing': date_closing, 'inception_date', 'dissolved_date', 'follows', 'replaces', 'adm_regions', 'countries', 'continents', 'capital_of', 'borders', 'near_water', 'latitude', 'longitude', 'wikititle', 'geonamesIDs', 'connectswith', 'street_address', 'street_located', 'postal_code'
```

## 5. Create a Wikidata-based gazetteer

The following script creates the gazetteer.

```
python create_wk_gazetteer.py
```

To create the gazetteer, it follows these steps:
1. It concatenates the different csv files from the previous step into a unified csv: `wikidata_gazetteer.csv`.
2. It collects alternate names and mentions from our Wikipedia resources and linkes them to Wikidata locations. Four dictionaries result from this step:
    * `mentions_to_wikidata.json`: For a given mention, a dictionary where the keys are the Wikidata ID that can be referred to by this mention, and the values are the absolute number of mentions given the Wikidata ID, for example:
      ```
      >>> data["London"]
      {'Q84': 76938, 'Q170027': 142, ...}
      ```
    * `wikidata_to_mentions.json`: The reversed dictionary, for example:
      ```
      >>> data["Q84"]
      {'London': 76938, 'City of London': 1, ...}
      ```
    * `mentions_to_wikidata_normalized.json`: For a given mention, each Wikidata ID is provided with the probability of it being referred to by such mention (being referred to by this is not the same as how likely a wikipedia ID is given a certain mention. I.e. the probability of London in Kiribati (Q2477346) of being referred to as "London" is 0.80, and that's the measure we are interested in here; the probability of having the London in Kiribati entry given the mention "London" would be close to 0, because most "London" mentions refer to the city in England, for example:
      ```
      >>> data["London"]
      {'Q84': 0.9762342820164698, 'Q170027': 0.02005083309799492, ...}
      ```
    * `wikidata_to_mentions_normalized.json`: The reversed dictionary, for example:
      ```
      >>> data["Q84"]
      {'London': 0.9762342820164698, 'City of London: 1.2688584080902413e-05, ...}
      ```
3. It produces a dictionary of Wikidata entity relevance, according to Wikipedia inlinks: `overall_entity_freq_wikidata.json`.

## 6. Map Wikidata entities to classes

The following scripts maps Wikidata entities to their most relevant class:

```
python produce_entity2class_dict.py
```

The resulting mapping is stored as a dictionary a `resources/entity2class.txt`.

## 7. Obtain GloVe and Entity Embeddings  

The following script will download [GloVe](https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/) and Entity embeddings (from [REL](https://github.com/informagi/REL)), following the setup done in REL. The scripts keep only embeddings for entities appearing in the gazetteer and changes their key from `ENTITY/Wikipedia_title` to `ENTITY/Wikidata_id`, to make things consistent across resources. Embeddings are finally aggregated in a single database called `embeddings_database.db` in two different tables: `glove_embeddings` and `entity_embeddings`.

## Final outputs

These scripts will produce the following outputs (note that entities are percent encoded across all files):

- In `resources/wikipedia/extractedResources/`:
  - A `Pages/` folder, containing a `.json` file for each page available in the input Wikipedia dump. Note that due to the presence of specific characters of to the length of some pages titles, some titles have been hashed.
  - `hashed_duplicates.csv`: just to check in case there are issues with duplicate hashed filenames. This file should remain empty.  
  - A `Store-Counts/` folder, containing partial counts as `.json` files.
  - `entities_overall_dict.json`: this is a dictionary which maps each entity to a `Counter` object of all possible mentions  
  - `mention_overall_dict.json`: this is a dictionary which maps each mention to a `Counter` object of all possible associated entities.
  - `overall_entity_freq.json`: this is a dictionary which simply maps an entity to its overall frequency in the Wikipedia corpus.
  - `overall_mentions_freq.json`: this is a dictionary which simply maps a mention to its overall frequency in the Wikipedia corpus.
  - `entity_inlink_dict.json`: this dictionary gives you a list of pages linking to each Wikipedia page.
  - `entity_outlink_dict.json`: this dictionary gives you a list of pages linked from each Wikipedia page.
  - `wikipedia2wikidata.json`: a dictionary mapping Wikipedia pages to Wikidata ids.
  - `wikidata2wikipedia.json`: a dictionary mapping Wikidata ids to a list of Wikipedia pages with associated frequency.
- In `resources/wikidata/extracted/`:
  - A list of `.csv` files, each containing 5,000 rows corresponding to geographical entities extracted from Wikidata.
  - `wikidata_gazetteer.csv`: The Wikidata-based gazetteer.
  - `mentions_to_wikidata.json`: A dictionary that maps mentions to Wikidata IDs (absolute counts).
  - `wikidata_to_mentions.json`: A dictionary that maps Wikidata IDs to mentions (absolute counts).
  - `mentions_to_wikidata_normalized.json`: A dictionary that maps mentions to Wikidata IDs (normalized).
  - `wikidata_to_mentions_normalized.json`: A dictionary that maps Wikidata IDs to mentions (normalized).
  - `overall_entity_freq_wikidata.json`: this is a dictionary which simply maps a Wikidata entity to its overall frequency in the Wikipedia corpus.
  - `gazetteer_entity_embeddings.npy`: Wikidata embeddings of entities in our gazetteer.
  - `gazetteer_entity_ids.txt`: Mapped Wikidata IDs of the entities in our gazetteer.
  - `gazetteer_wkdtclass_embeddings.npy`: Wikidata embeddings of entity classes in our gazetteer.
  - `gazetteer_wkdtclass_ids.txt`: Mapped Wikidata IDs of the entity classes in our gazetteer.
- In `resources/`:
  - `embeddings_database.db`: A database containing GloVe and Entity embeddings.

## Credits

This repository collects a series of scripts written by Mariona Coll Ardanuy and Federico Nanni as part of the Living with Machines project. It was supported by Living with Machines (AHRC grant AH/S01179X/1) and The Alan Turing Institute (EPSRC grant EP/ N510129/1).
